You were saying the things that got us into that
situation. The things that got us into those
situations, I think, are a breakdown in some of
those qualities of leadership that I spoke about
earlier. Integrity,
openness,
integrity, and... qualities of advisors
it's just you know if if if those qualities had been
as they should have been I don't think we'd had
those things Watergate for instance I don't think
well in first place it was bad judgment and
judgment is a great part of leadership it was bad
judgment initially it was integrity and honesty
with the people that the president covered up what
he did i'm not a expert politician but i think
looking back on it had the president immediately
said what happened opened up the files and said you
know we made a mistake wipe it off i think it would
have blown away but You know, there's nobody good
enough liar to tell the same story over and over and
keep it going. Yeah, right. And I'll tell you, he
did that. Of course, there was a lot more to it than
that, but, you know, you can just see faults of
leadership all the way up and down the line that
causes political crisis, military crisis, or
crisis in the highway department, any of them, any
crisis. Yeah, right. Let's... Do you have any
other thoughts that you'd like to express on
leadership before we turn to another topic? Well,
I'd just say this. There is no substitute for
leadership. There is no substitute.
There's people that can succeed with one kind of
leadership, as we said, another kind of
leadership, and you've got one kind and I've got
another. But you've got to have some quality of
leadership, or you will go under. Your people will
not respect you. And the many people who do not
respect you, well, then you've got disaster. So
I'll just sum it up. The importance of leadership
is that it's an absolute must, or you're not going
to succeed.
Simple. Let's turn now. to Texas A&M. Back to Texas
A&M, we talked about Texas A&M back in the 1930's
when you were here. There have been some major
changes at this institution since that time and
I'd like your thoughts as a former student on the
changes that came about at this university,
especially in the 1960's. What are your thoughts
on The end of the mandatory Corps of Cadets.
Well, I think I could answer that this way. I think
that we ought to have mandatory military training
nationwide. I think everybody ought to serve some
responsibility for the defense of this country. I
think we're, whatever you call it, mandatory
military or mandatory training. I think
everybody ought to have some training in
military, hospital, or some part of the welfare
and defense of this country. Could you develop
that? For a short time. How short? Oh, maybe a year,
18 months. are something to get his foot in the door
of knowing the responsibility, knowing the needs
of defense, knowing the needs of the country, and
above that, somebody knowing what his
capabilities are, and have a record of him. This
business of turning everybody loose and then have
to go back and re... register and all this i think
that's a wheel spinning i think it's a waste and i
think it leads to unpreparedness so my thinking of
that i think there should be if you if it's a
military school i think you ought to have if you're
physically capable i would i saw nothing wrong
with having mandatory ROTC, two years. If people
don't care for that any longer, then they go into
the civilian. That would be like 18 months or a year
or whatever outside. But I think where there's
that privilege, anybody that doesn't take the
opportunity of it, I think they're missing a great
deal. Were you sorry then to see the university
shift away from the mandatory report? Yes. And I
know why they did it. You know, it was not popular.
And I'm sure that it would have run off a lot of
students. But, you know, I think maybe more
schools should have it. I think it would not hurt to
have a basic understanding of military
responsibility. Because as far as you and I are
sitting here, some of these days we may need it, or
will need it, most likely. No, you said everybody.
Are you including women? I don't see anything
wrong with that. There would probably be more
women that might have deferments or some such
thing as that, but there still could be places of
service. But I really can't see a great deal of
difference. Depending on their marital status or
their responsibility
status or whatever, you know, the ladies have said
that they want equal opportunities. I don't know
why that shouldn't be one of them. I was not a bit
sorry to see them integrated into the service. You
could get a place. Now, let's talk about that for a
minute. Did you have women under your command?
They were just coming into the service. We had a few
at that time, but it was not very prevalent at that
time. How were they accepted? Oh, there was some
reluctance,
but, you know, the job they could do is as well as
men. And I think it depends entirely upon their
attitude because they have job skills just as in
the civilian market. There are things that women
do to exceed men. So, but it was slow. It was a thing
that was, you know, they had to get used to. You told
me two days ago, I believe, that you had In the
420th, did you say 4,500 men and officers? At one
time. At one time. How many of those were women?
Very few. Half a dozen? I doubt if there were very
many more than that. It was just a very few, and at
this point I really don't remember. But they were
just not significant at all. because see this was
in 1971. Yeah.
But uh- Did you recruit for women?
I don't believe we did at that time. Had not and I
guess they do now. And why didn't you? Because you
had plenty of men. Well that's one thing we never
were even up to the time I retired we we had not we did
not have personnel problems in that respect. In
fact, as I told you the other day, we had waiting
lists. In fact, we had to keep a very
well-oriented and well-run waiting list so that
we could substantiate those that we took in.
But I've always had a feeling that I'll let the
person do the job that's best qualified
regardless of their
status in life, whether it's man, woman, or what.
Now, speaking of women, what were your feelings
when A&M allowed women You went to an all-male
institution back in the 1930s, and now it's the
freshman class is 51% women. What were your
feelings about allowing women? I thought it was
one of the smartest things they ever did.
Why? Why is that? Well, because at first it's a
tax-supported institution,
and there are women who want to go to school, I think
it, in my opinion, it
enhanced even enrollment of men. There were a lot
of people that would not go to an all-male school,
and I'm sure the same as to an all-women's school.
But,
well, it just made sense. Why exclude any one
gender? The school was there. They had the
facilities. They had the capability. And in
addition to that, I had a daughter that I wanted to
go to school with. But I really thought that was a
landmark decision. I was tickled to death. And I
know that a lot of my colleagues don't agree with
that. I'm talking about my vintage. In fact, I've
had some My classmates say that Mr. Rudder was the
downfall of any university because this happened
under his rule, but I've had some very strong
arguments with him that I think it put the place on
an upward course. Oh, I thought he was great. I
think I can predict this, but what do you think
about racial integration that came about under
General Rudder? There ain't nothing wrong with
that either. Of course, over the last three
interviews, you've sort of seen my feeling toward
the black race particularly. And we just use all
races. But the black race is the one that's mostly
in controversy. But if they're academically
qualified and have the intention to go, Well,
that's like the women were. They were just as
entitled to go as I was.
There was tremendous growth. There were about, I
think, 4,000 students when you were here in 1940,
about that. Right about that. And as late as 1960,
there were only around 6,000, 7,000, and now
there's 31,000. What have you thought about this
incredible growth that we've had? I don't
understand it. Except that I think that it's a
further mark of the quality of the institution. We
were growing when other institutions had leveled
off. And I have heard, well, one in particular, Dr.
Williams, other than Mr. Rutter, say that we had
been visited by people, administrators from
other institutions, to find out what the recipe
was. And I'm not sure they could tell them, other
than these things that I've talked about, the
quality of the institution,
The openness of the administration, and the fact
that the school's got a great reputation, and the
fact that they finally saw fit to open it up to
ladies, all races, and whatnot. But it's, I think,
mainly it's the quality of the institution. I like
to think that. Now let's talk about General
Rudder. It was during his tenure in office that
these changes took place. When did you first meet
him?
Well, I met him several times in the reserve
program prior to his assuming the presidency of
A&M in mutual reserve meetings and exercises and
whatnot. but not really on a personal basis until
about the time that he came to A&M. And I got better
acquainted with him just by the fact that he was in
town. But when I really got acquainted with him is,
as I assumed, more responsibility in the highway
department, because we had a great many mutual
problems, highway department, university, with
all their lands. and roads that were built in and
around and through. And then his... So you were
cooperating then with the president? And your
district were cooperating to build roads? Sure.
See, we, under my administration, we built Jersey
Street, you know, right across the campus. We
built the highway that's on the south side of the
campus along with the railroad we built the
underpass out there by the agriculture building
and we widened and expanded jersey street i mean uh
university drive we extended university drive
back to the east
expanded highway six you know just all around and
through as well as the west loop the west loop
around town entailed a great bit of university
property. So I dealt with him on many very
intricate and detailed planning of roads and
facilities in and around the stadium and the
university tubes. So would you explain how it
worked? Would he take care of the roads inside the
campus and you take, or how did it work? How was the
relationship? Well, in a time that we had any plans
for expansion or improvement adjacent to the
campus or through any of the lands of the campus,
some of it even had to go to the Board of Regents for
approval because we got some land from them for the
West Loop, for instance, and the Jersey Street. We
took part of the lands of the university and he had
to clear this through the Board of Regents. So as we
would plan these facilities, we would work
closely with him to get his ideas and input into how
it could serve and what would be the best facility
and where it ought to be and this sort of thing. And
then, of course, we built it, but it was done with
mutual coordination. Whose funds? Highway
Department. Highway Department. They did not put
any funds into any of the roads that we built in and
around the university and where we had some of
their lands it was it was donated to to the highway
department to build roads on but it was highway
funds which are some state and some federal
when people work with other people it's usually
rather easy to work with them and they're very
cooperative when you're going to do something for
them But when you're not going to do something for
him, then things often change. What kind of man was
General Rutter when you told him that you couldn't
do something that he wanted accomplished? Well,
he would immediately say, go back and think about
it. I remember a very, very specific problem that
we had that we We resolved, but it was not to his
liking. And here again, I think that takes
leadership. If I want you to do something that you
don't want to do or you resist, it takes some
leadership from me to convince you that it ought to
be done or you ought to do it. We started to build
Jersey Street. And we had already built the street
on the west side of the campus by the railroad. And
to get specific with you, we'd made it 57 feet wide.
And it proved very shortly that it was too narrow.
It congested when it parked along it. It just
wasn't wide enough. You had no room for left turn
movements. So it was under design. We made a
mistake. We started to build Jersey Street. We
designed it to have a 16-foot common left turn
meeting, four running lanes, and two parking
lanes. And Mr. Rudder never fell out of his chair
when he saw what we had, because it was going to take
part of his soccer field and part of the golf
course. And he said, no way. says go back and do some
figuring so we went back then we didn't do any more
figuring we just let it rest a while went back to him
and told him that we had come up with the idea that we
were not we were not excessive in our design and
that we felt like that's where it would be built and
he said what about this street over here I said well
it's too narrow I was used to making two mistakes
But he still didn't like it, and he said, go back and
think about it again. So we went back and pondered a
while, and finally he called me and said, what do
you think? And I said, well, Mr. Rutter, I am not
going to be a party to making the same mistake
twice. And I said, now, we've got the money for
this. The highway department's ready to let the
contract. And I think we're depriving the people
of a facility But I would not recommend to the
Highway Department to do the same thing we did
before. His question to me is, have you been
talking to some of my Board of Regents? And I said,
well, certainly not. Why? He said, well, none of my
Board of Regents told me at the last meeting, when
you build Jersey Street, don't let them build it
too narrow.
Well, I won the battle with the help of somebody.
man when he was when he had his headset it was
difficult because he was a strong leader and he had
his own ideas but I've met with him on lots of
occasions lots of occasions and we were we were
pretty much of the same mind he was progressive and
wanted his money spent well didn't want to throw it
away and of course I felt the same way sure but uh He
was headstrong. He had his firm convictions. Of
course, I admire a man with convictions. That gets
us to the next question. What was your opinion of
him as a person? I thought he was fantastic. I
thought he was, well, of course, he was the most
intimate president of A&M that I was ever
socialized. I mean, my relations were intimate. I
knew more of him, I dealt with him more, but I
thought he was, I thought he did more for A&M than
anybody before or after. I'm talking about
because of the length of time he was there and the
amount of changes made. I was a great admirer of
his.
I think he was a successful leader in both military
and in this institution and I think Without
question, he, I'll use the word, he fooled many of
those people who were responsible for putting him
in that position. Yeah, how did that come? Do you
know anything about that? Only what I read, and
that is that they figured he'd smoothly glide the
boat along, wouldn't rock it, you know, and
wouldn't upset anything, but I was mistaken about
him. Well, was there a reasoning problem firing
President Miller, it appears that the board
pretty much rules the university. And when they
saw these changes coming under General Rutter,
why do you think? Do you think he was just too
powerful? Why do you think that they gave him so
much latitude And here again, I've just got to
quote Joe Hanover, but I think they were pleased
with what he was doing. Now that's the only answer I
could have.
You know, otherwise they probably wouldn't
tolerate it. And some of the subsequent ones, they
must not have been pleased with what was going on.
But it was... getting too powerful, or whether it
was didn't like the way it was administered, or
just what, because they had that authority. And
it's very evident to me that they must have been
pleased with with John Rutter, because I don't
think anybody's too powerful for him to take
whatever action they see fit. Now, that's pure
speculation.
Finally, During this interview, we've examined
early years, your education, your military
career, both in active duty and the reserves, a lot
of ideas and opinions that you've had about the
military of Texas and on the leadership. We must
have left out somewhere along the line some
important issues that you'd like to discuss or
opinions or any other aspects of your life, have
we?
Well, I guess inadvertently we may have, but I'm
not real sure that I could start out and enumerate a
lot of things.
I just look back on both my military career and my
civilian career and attribute my training at
Texas A&M to a large degree for the success of both
of them. I started my military career there. I
started my civilian engineer career there. I
think I had teachers and associates in both
aspects that I have a great deal of respect for. I
think we're largely responsible for motivating
me into doing the things that I needed to do to get a
good basic education in both I think once I got out
and began to hit some of life's problems I I look
back there to to really see you know what the what
the foundation was. Of course, World War II coming
along took us to a completely different vocation
very shortly. I think the fact that I did have good
training at A&M could very well be the reason I'm
here today. I think it taught me
self-preservation. I think it taught me respect
for my fellow man. I think it taught me my
responsibilities to the civilian world, to the
military world, to my family, to my generations
coming behind me. I think all these things are
started to ferment and grow right there at Texas
A&M.
I had a man at Command General Staff, a man Colonel
at the Command General Staff School that made a
comment one time that has really stuck with me. We
were just sitting around bullying one night in an
off session and somebody asked him, Colonel Bones
said, we get out of school, how are we going to know
what we learned in this place? And Command General
Staff is the school for higher commanders and
staffs at Fort Leavenworth, you had so much stuff
that was taught to you, so many leadership
courses, so many tactics, you know, the gamut,
just cram and cram and cram. He said, when you get
through, even though you've passed examinations
and you've passed critiques and all this, he says,
when we get back home, how are we going to know what
we learned at this place? And he said, when the
problem arises and you find the solution to it, he
says, you began to think a little bit, where did I
learn this? Or where did I get the background to
make this decision? He says, I think you'll
remember that it was talked about at Fort
Lattenworth. And you know, that has really stuck
in my mind. And I have analyzed that a great many
times after I'd find a solution to some kind of
problem. I think, where did I learn that? Or who
gave me the idea to do this? And I think that's a real
good lesson in
things where you have an opportunity to mingle
with fellow man and go to school or study or
research. It doesn't really do you any good right
then. But you store it away. And one of these days
you have to make a decision, problem arises, and
looking for the answer. It's interesting to think
back, where did I learn this? Or how did I decide
this course of action? And he really gave me
something to think about that day. I wish more
people would think back on and try to analyze
things in their life. Sure. It would mean my job a
lot more. Yeah. I thought it was a terrific answer.
And it did. When we got out of school up there, you
know, I'm not sure if somebody had said, sit down
there and write what all you learned up there. Man,
you couldn't have. You mean at Fort Leavenworth?
Yeah. When you got on? Yeah. You couldn't have. You
could have maybe covered a cigarette paper or
something like that. But, oh, it must have, you
know, the stuff that you stored away there that you
recalled when the time came, it made it a terrific
learning process. and I tried to remember that all
these subsequent schools and seminars that I was
privileged to go to and as you say I went to a whole
lot of them. What another question along these
lines then let's say you would have gone to another
university now of course this is all hypothetical
but if you would have gone to another university do
you feel that You would have had this training
where you could make these decisions.